See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/316455797](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/316455797_Making_%27Smart_Meters%27_smarter_Insights_from_a_behavioural_economics_pilot_field_experiment_in_Copenhagen_Denmark?enrichId=rgreq-c6bda53878b41a9e596b9620e7f23ed2-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxNjQ1NTc5NztBUzo0ODY5OTg5MTkxMjcwNDBAMTQ5MzEyMDk5ODMxNA%3D%3D&el=1_x_2&_esc=publicationCoverPdf)

# [Making 'Smart Meters' smarter? Insights from a behavioural economics pilot](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/316455797_Making_%27Smart_Meters%27_smarter_Insights_from_a_behavioural_economics_pilot_field_experiment_in_Copenhagen_Denmark?enrichId=rgreq-c6bda53878b41a9e596b9620e7f23ed2-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxNjQ1NTc5NztBUzo0ODY5OTg5MTkxMjcwNDBAMTQ5MzEyMDk5ODMxNA%3D%3D&el=1_x_3&_esc=publicationCoverPdf) field experiment in Copenhagen, Denmark

**Article** in Energy Research & Social Science · June 2017

|  |  |  | DOI: 10.1016/j.erss.2017.04.008 |
|--|--|--|---------------------------------|
|  |  |  |                                 |

| CITATIONS  |                               | READS |                                 |
|------------|-------------------------------|-------|---------------------------------|
| 60         |                               | 460   |                                 |
| 2 authors: |                               |       |                                 |
|            | Simon Bager<br>Klimate.co     |       | Luis Mundaca<br>Lund University |
|            | 27 PUBLICATIONS 457 CITATIONS |       | 82 PUBLICATIONS 2,961 CITATIONS |
|            | SEE PROFILE                   |       | SEE PROFILE                     |

Image /page/1/Picture/1 description: The image shows the Elsevier logo. The logo consists of a tree with a man standing next to it. The man is wearing a robe and appears to be picking fruit from the tree. A banner with the text "NON SOLUS" is draped over the tree. Below the image is the word "ELSEVIER" in orange.

Contents lists available at [ScienceDirect](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/22146296)

Energy Research & Social Science

Image /page/1/Picture/4 description: The image is a book cover with the title "ENERGY RESEARCH & SOCIAL SCIENCE" in bold, dark green letters. The top left corner has a small logo. The bottom half of the cover features a gradient from dark green to light blue, with a stylized globe graphic in the center. The globe is green with a white outline of a city skyline. The background is white.

journal homepage: [www.elsevier.com/locate/erss](http://www.elsevier.com/locate/erss)

### Perspectives

## Making 'Smart Meters' smarter? Insights from a behavioural economics pilot field experiment in Copenhagen, Denmark

Image /page/1/Picture/8 description: The image shows the CrossMark logo, which consists of a blue circle containing a red bookmark icon, followed by the text "CrossMark" in a simple, sans-serif font.

## Simon Bager[a](#page-1-0) , Luis Mundaca[b](#page-1-1),[⁎](#page-1-2)

<span id="page-1-0"></span><sup>a</sup> COWI A/S, Parallelvej 2, 2800 Lyngby, Denmark

<span id="page-1-1"></span><sup>b</sup> International Institute for Industrial Environmental Economics at Lund University, Tegnérsplatsen 4, PO Box 196, 22100 Lund, Sweden

### ARTICLE INFO

Keywords: Behavioural economics Demand-side response Loss aversion Residential sector Smart meters

#### ABSTRACT

This paper examines the relationship between loss aversion and consumer behaviour in a non-price policy intervention that followed the installation of smart meter (SM) technology. Drawing upon insights from behavioural economics, we propose that consumers underestimate potential gains and overestimate potential financial losses resulting from electricity use. To test the hypothesis, we carried out a pilot study involving the installation of SM technology in Copenhagen, Denmark. The analysis used two baselines, and the differential effects revealed that the provision of loss-framed, salient information reduced daily demand by 7–11%, compared to unframed information. Reductions in standby consumption were more pronounced, with a differential effect of 16–25%. Despite the limitations inherent in a pilot study, notably the small sample size, the findings suggest that policies that address SM technology need to consider not only the pure provision of information, but also how it is designed and presented to users. Several aspects for further research are identified.

#### 1. Introduction

Behavioural economics (BE) can be broadly defined as the branch of economics that focuses on cognitive biases, and the motivational and contextual factors that affect individual decision-making processes and resulting choices. Drawing heavily upon psychology and sociology [1–[3\]](#page-7-0), BE focuses on the analysis of behavioural failures (e.g. biases, heuristics, illusions, anomalies) that may lead to consumers behaviour that is inconsistent with rational choice theory [\[1,4\].](#page-7-0) This expanding theoretical and applied field encompasses prospect theory, cognitive science and intertemporal choice − among others [\[5](#page-7-1)–9]. It relies on randomised control trial (or field) experiments and statistical techniques [\[1\]](#page-7-0) to enhance our understanding of economic behaviour and provide more accurate predictions that can support economic analysis and policy design (e.g. via 'nudging' or 'choice settings') [\[1,2\].](#page-7-0) One of the central tenets is that cognitive, emotional and social factors influence how information is perceived and understood. This impacts "rational" behaviour and, in turn, affects (economic) decision-making [\[1\].](#page-7-0)

Despite the growing consensus on the usefulness and applicability of BE to energy and climate mitigation policy [\[6,7,10,11\],](#page-7-2) policymakers continue to take a traditional approach that focuses on technical change (e.g. energy-efficient technologies), production-based policies (e.g. the European Emissions Trading Scheme), market failures (e.g. negative externalities, imperfect information) and price mechanisms (e.g. energy taxes) [cf. [12–[17\]\]](#page-7-3). Innovative policy approaches and evaluations that address energy use choices and behavioural anomalies appear to be confined to a few academic disciplines (e.g. environmental psychology), experimental settings (e.g. marketing research), and utility-driven initiatives [\[18](#page-8-0)–25]. Effective energy and climate policies rely upon critical assumptions about human behaviour, and related decision models (e.g. utility maximisation and consistent preferences). However, these assumptions are challenged by BE [\[6,26,27\],](#page-7-2) related disciplines (e.g. psychology) [\[23,28,29\]](#page-8-1) and the seminal work of Herbert Simon on bounded rationality [30–[32\]](#page-8-2). The latest IPCC Assessment Report (Working Group III) has concluded that "more research that incorporates behavioural economics into climate change mitigation is needed. For instance, more work on understanding how individuals and their social preferences respond to (ambitious) policy instruments and make decisions relevant to climate change is critical" [\[27\].](#page-8-3)

The so-called 'Energy Efficiency Gap', which describes the slow diffusion of profitable, efficient technologies that fail to achieve market success [\[33](#page-8-4)–35], is an example. Rational choice theory assumes homogenous energy users with clear preferences, perfect information, unbounded rationality, etc. [\[36,37\].](#page-8-5) However, promising estimates of energy-efficiency potentials and related cost savings have

<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2017.04.008>

Received 19 December 2016; Received in revised form 6 April 2017; Accepted 10 April 2017

2214-6296/ © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/BY-NC-ND/4.0/).

<span id="page-1-2"></span><sup>⁎</sup> Corresponding author.

E-mail address: [luis.mundaca@iiiee.lu.se](mailto:luis.mundaca@iiiee.lu.se) (L. Mundaca).

been found using energy-economy models that depart from this theoretical framework [\[38\]](#page-8-6). At the same time, empirical analyses have consistently shown the challenges in persuading energy users to modify their behaviour and embrace efficient technologies [\[10,18,35,38](#page-7-4)–43]. Despite the benefits of increased energy efficiency, there has been little progress. While various market and behavioural failures have been held responsible, the lack of progress is also consistent with the unrealistic assumptions about behaviour that are found in most energy and climate mitigation policies [\[11,23,27,29,38,44](#page-7-5)–46]. Examples in the domain of energy use and conservation include heuristics (rules-of-thumb), misconceptions, intuition and choice overload [\[6,11,38,39,42\].](#page-7-2)

In the European Union (EU), Member States have deployed a wide variety of policy mechanisms to mitigate market failures associated with energy efficiency. The introduction of smart meters (SMs) is expected to result in a 10% reduction in consumption in the residential sector [\[47\]](#page-8-7). A central tenet of the measure is that the information provided by the SM will enable end users to make more rational decisions about their energy service demands (e.g. lighting).[1](#page-2-0) Sixteen Member States will proceed with the large-scale rollout of SMs by 2020 or earlier, while three others have opted for selective rollouts. Overall, Member States have committed to rolling out close to 200 million SMs, and it is expected that almost 72% of European consumers will have an electricity SM by 2020, at a total cost of €35 billion [\[48\]](#page-8-8).

Consistent with traditional policymaking, the attention has focused on technical issues, such as grid connectivity, the role of network operators, deployment rates, investment levels and cost-revenue ratios [49–[52\]](#page-8-9). However, and critical for the effectiveness of SM, much less is known about behavioural factors, such as the role of cognitive limitations, norms and beliefs regarding SM technology [53–[59\].](#page-8-10) Gillingham and Palmer [\[19\]](#page-8-11) highlight this knowledge gap in the context of policy intervention, and argue that "more research is needed that closely examines both the information provision context and the behavioral failure". Similarly, Frederiks et al. [\[11\]](#page-7-5) conclude that cognitive biases and motivational factors affecting energy use and conservation are frequently ignored by both policymakers and practitioners.

There is a growing body of research on the link with household energy demand (see Section [2\)](#page-2-1) and multiple studies have addressed issues such as (framed) feedback, enabling technologies and electricity use [\[18,60](#page-8-0)–65]. In the Nordic region, for instance, Ek and Söderholm [\[66\]](#page-8-12) analysed the impact of framed, salient information on electricity savings, Pyrko [\[67\]](#page-8-13) investigated changing electricity use patterns via SMs, and Hansen and Hauge [\[68\]](#page-8-14) studied enacted and perceived control from the perspectives of the smart grid designer and households. However, there appears to be no investigation of the effect of lossframed salient information provided by SMs in a Nordic country.

In this context, we launched a pilot study[2](#page-2-2) that looked at the potential impact of loss aversion on electricity use via a non-price intervention for a group of SM users (homogenous customers) in Copenhagen, Denmark. Following Gowdy, we assume that loss aversion can be manipulated through the 'framing effect'; in other words, that "the frame of reference may change according to how a particular choice is presented" [\[26\]](#page-8-15). As for salience, this is understood as the ease with which data can be understood and processed, and is a function of the extent to which a given piece of information stands out relative to other information [\[1,71\]](#page-7-0). The hypothesis is that framing electricity use as a salient, financial loss has more impact on behaviour than if energy savings are perceived as a gain. [3](#page-2-3) In a nutshell, this pilot study sought to answer the following question: does the provision of loss-framed, salient, SM information lead households to potentially reduce their electricity use? Results from our pilot study aim to inform and prepare a full-scale field experiment.

The paper is structured as follows. Section [2](#page-2-1) provides a brief synopsis of the literature on loss aversion in the context of household energy demand. Section [3](#page-3-0) elaborates on the methodology and describes the experiment and data collection. Section [4](#page-5-0) outlines the key findings. Finally, some concluding remarks are presented in Section [5](#page-7-6).

#### <span id="page-2-1"></span>2. Loss aversion and household energy demand: a snapshot

Loss aversion (or gain–loss asymmetry) is defined as the tendency to place greater value on relative losses than gains; it is a core insight that is found in (cumulative) prospect theory [\[5,75\].](#page-7-1) Loss aversion has various conceptual ramifications and applications for BE (e.g. reference dependence, risk aversion, status quo, framing, uncertainty).[4](#page-2-4) Although the following is by no means exhastive, it provides a general overview of related work.

Thaler [\[73\]](#page-8-16) applied prospect theory to riskless choices and showed that individuals attach greater value to goods or services they already own. This value is often much higher than the initial purchase price —a violation of consumer theory that Thaler termed the 'endowment effect'. Further research demonstrated that goods are valued more highly when they are perceived as a potential loss than a potential gain [77–[80\]](#page-8-17). This means that perceived gains and losses are dependent on, and relative to, a status quo (or 'reference point') [\[72,77\]](#page-8-18). Reference dependence refers to a decision-making scenario under uncertainty, in which gains and advantages have much less impact on preferences than losses and disadvantages [\[72,81\]](#page-8-18). Loss aversion also plays a role in 'status quo bias' [\[82\],](#page-8-19) which means that individuals have a preference to do nothing and stick to default or given options.

In the domain of energy, the literature suggests that users perceive that, ceteris paribus, the potential losses or risks associated with change (e.g. improvements to their building's envelope) outweigh the financial benefits of energy savings, and consequently, they prefer the status quo [\[11,19,24,83\].](#page-7-5) The idea is confirmed by Gonzalez et al. [\[84\]](#page-8-20), who trained energy auditors in loss-aversion framing, and found it to be effective in encouraging households to invest in retrofits. Similarly, Farsi [\[85\]](#page-8-21) finds that considerations of risk affect the willingness to pay for energy-efficient systems. Given uncertainties regarding the benefits and expected energy savings, users may undervalue investments in efficient technologies [\[85\].](#page-8-21) Attari et al. [\[86\]](#page-8-22) analyse perceptions of energy use and savings, and find that individuals systematically undervalue (by a factor of 2.8 on average) savings and favour conventional practices. Evidence also shows that reference dependence (or the status quo effect), together with heuristics and information costs, prevents users from switching to other electricity suppliers and benefitting from lower charges [\[87\].](#page-8-23) Cognitive limitations (heuristics) suggest that energy users prefer the current state of affairs because they are unable to correctly balance costs and benefits when comparing energy-consuming durables [\[88\]](#page-8-24) —all the more so if information complexity increases [\[11\]](#page-7-5). [5](#page-2-5) Similarly, bounded willpower (e.g. procrastination) may exacerbate the status quo bias, as individuals postpone investments [\[6\].](#page-7-2) Uncertainty and loss aversion have been said to lead to the 'overdiscounting' of future fuel savings, and the need for very short payback periods [\[90\].](#page-9-0) However, many other market barriers and behavioural failures have been proposed to explain high

<span id="page-2-0"></span><sup>1</sup> The EU Energy Services Directive (Directive 2006/32/EC) accelerated the development of SM technology, inter alia by requiring suppliers to offer consumers competitivelypriced individual meters that could provide time-of-use information (art. 13, sub1) and accurate bills based on actual consumption (art. 13, sub 2). Its implementation prompted

<span id="page-2-2"></span>the rollout of SMs in many Member States. <sup>2</sup> As the reader may know, a pilot study is a small-scale, preparatory version of a major study [\[69,70\].](#page-8-25)

<span id="page-2-3"></span><sup>3</sup> Previous research has argued that the (social) decision context and the choice architecture in which information is presented, along with heuristics, biases, and salience influence how individuals respond to information and make decisions [72–[74\].](#page-8-18) <sup>4</sup> For a comprehensive review see Kahneman and Tversky [\[76\]](#page-8-26). <sup>5</sup> Allcott and Greenstone [\[89\]](#page-8-27) argue that there is a lack of convincing empirical

<span id="page-2-4"></span>

<span id="page-2-5"></span>evidence for consumer myopia in energy-efficiency investments.

(implicit) discount rates that hinder the adoption of efficient technologies. These include asymmetric information, transaction costs, and context-dependent preferences [\[28,41,91](#page-8-28)–93].

In the specific domain of electricity use and dynamic pricing, Spurlock [\[94\]](#page-9-1) analyses differentiated pricing and loss aversion, and shows that households are more likely to reduce peak consumption when they are in a loss domain of their value function than in a gain domain. Depending on the chosen reference group and probability effects, reductions in peak electricity consumption are estimated to be 1.2–4.3%. Faruqui and Sergici [\[95\]](#page-9-2) analyse 15 pilot studies, and find that while time-of-use tariffs (TOU, i.e. different tariffs according to the time of day) lead to reductions in peak demand by 3–6%, critical peak pricing (CPP, i.e. higher tariffs during peak times) triggered reductions of 13–20%. When combined with enabling technologies (e.g. SMs), CPP achieved reductions of 27–44% in peak demand. Nicolson et al. [\[96\]](#page-9-3) find that loss aversion is likely to hamper consumer uptake of 'smart' TOU.[6](#page-3-1) The authors estimate 93% of bill payers to be loss-averse, and thus less willing to switch to smart TOU. Based on a randomised field experiment in the United Kingdom, the study shows that loss-framed messages are unlikely to overcome loss aversion and encourage the uptake of smart TOU. Also in the United Kingdom, Bradley et al. [\[97\]](#page-9-4) explore the role of loss aversion in reducing peak electricity demand. For each participating household (10 in total), an 'incentive account' of £36 was established. This money represented the potential gain if a household shifted all of their electricity use to off-peak. The hypothesis was that households were motivated to do so "in order to avoid losing part of the potential reward" [\[97\]](#page-9-4). Reductions in peak demand were estimated to be 56–59%. Finally, Pollitt and Shaorshadze [\[6\]](#page-7-2) argue that for loss aversion to play a role in the implementation of dynamic pricing, "rate increases during peak periods may have to be compensated with larger rate decreases during off-peak periods". [7](#page-3-2)

Studies also highlight the role of default settings in household energy use. For instance, Brennan [\[100\]](#page-9-5) shows that users are normally unwilling to switch utility companies, even when they are wellinformed about the benefits. Evidence from field studies shows that users (non-)acceptance of energy initiatives is dependent upon default options. Pichert and Katsikopoulus [\[101\]](#page-9-6) examine consumer decisionmaking related to green electricity, and find a robust effect for default options: more participants chose green electricity when it was offered as the default option, than when 'mixed electricity' (fossil fuels, nuclear and renewables) was the default. Likewise, Loock et al. [\[102\]](#page-9-7) analyse the role of default 'energy saving goals' in encouraging energy-saving behaviour. Although the study finds statistically significant savings, if default saving goals are set too low or too high in relation to a self-set goal, they may have a detrimental effect [\[102\]](#page-9-7). [8](#page-3-3)

Overall, the literature underlines the complexities of the relationship between household energy use and behavioural change, and highlights that various psychological, moral, socio-economic, population-segment, and contextual aspects affect the effectiveness of behavioural interventions.

#### <span id="page-3-0"></span>3. Materials and method

#### 3.1. A pilot study

The experiment was run in a real-life setting on a sample of

homogenous customers, where consumers actually used and paid for their electricity. It was carried out in collaboration with NorthQ, a producer of SM technology. A 'recruit and deny' randomised strategy [\[104\]](#page-9-8) was applied to assign households to reference and intervention groups. First we identified participants with an interest in our initiative (vaguely defined as "energy efficiency in the residential sector"), and then used a lottery to randomly allocate households to the intervention group. The remaining households formed the reference group.

The experiment used so-called "add-on" SMs. These meters are added to an analogue meter in order to collect, store and transmit data between the electricity supplier and the end user. As no In-Home Display (IHD) was installed, users accessed consumption information using software installed on their smartphones, tablets or computers. The reference group received 'standard SM' consumption information given in kilowatt-hours (kWh) and Danish Krone (DKK)[9](#page-3-4) on an hourly, daily, weekly, monthly or yearly basis (see [Fig. 1A](#page-4-0)). They could also evaluate their current consumption with respect to a pre-determined annual budget (in DKK) − typically their electricity costs in the previous calendar year. This information was unframed; the cost of electricity for a day, month and year was simply stated.

The intervention group received the same data, plus additional lossframed and salient information in the form of the estimated cost of daily and weekly standard use, and the daily and annual cost of standby use (see [Fig. 1](#page-4-0)B). Overnight consumption (from 11 p.m. to 6 a.m.) was used a proxy for standby use. This information was framed as a salient loss by its presentation in the software interface, which read: "Money lost from electricity consumption" followed by the monetary value. The SM displayed the amount spent per day as a running total; this figure was updated every few seconds and reset every day, meaning that it looked like money was flowing out of users' pockets. Estimated weekly cost was updated every 15 min, and standby consumption data was updated daily. With respect to salience, theory suggests that it is easier to process a single, aggregate number (e.g. total cost) rather than numerous, disaggregated values. This is because less mental effort is needed to understand, process and act upon one event [\[71\].](#page-8-29)

The characteristics of the buildings occupied by both groups of households were similar. All were semi-detached houses, constructed around the same time, and connected to the district heating grid. None used electric heating, and floorspace varied from 103 to 130 m<sup>2</sup> . All were located in the same neighbourhood in Copenhagen, Denmark (see [Fig. 2\)](#page-5-1). This level of homogeneity made it relatively easier to compare the reference and intervention groups. Given the characteristics of the neighbourhood, homeowners were assumed to be relatively wealthy.

#### 3.2. Data collection and sources

Initially, 85 potenial participants were identified. Of these, 65 gave written consent. However, only 16 had installed the SM technology when the experiment began (an 18.8% participation rate). Given that this is a pilot study, it is important to note that small samples (and short-lived interventions) predominate in SM and environmental studies [\[63,105](#page-8-30)–109]. In this context, our sample size and participation rate are similar to those found in the peer-reviewed literature.[10](#page-3-5) Small samples are a consequence of the intrusive nature of SM technology, and there is growing literature that stresses ethical and privacy concerns among SM customers [\[56,111,112\]](#page-8-31). Negative perceptions and a lack of trust seem to be critical factors [\[54,55,57,113\]](#page-8-32). Privacy

<span id="page-3-1"></span><sup>6</sup> Smart TOU can charge electricity users at two or more rates without the need for

<span id="page-3-2"></span>additional meters [\[96\].](#page-9-3) <sup>7</sup> Several authors have raised ethical issues regarding dynamic pricing interventions, notably the fact that in many countries low-income customers have lower price elasticity

<span id="page-3-3"></span>than higher-income customers [\[98,99\]](#page-9-9). <sup>8</sup> Despite the ethical and methodological challenges associated with default or choice settings (e.g. who should decide, extrapolation to the general population), the literature shows that defaults can complement policies and measures to encourage more sustainable consumer behaviour [\[103\].](#page-9-10)

<span id="page-3-5"></span><span id="page-3-4"></span><sup>9</sup> 1 DKK=0.134 Euro, 1 DKK=0.148 USD (10 November 2016) ([www.oanda.com](http://www.oanda.com)). <sup>10</sup> For example, Bradley et al. [\[97\]](#page-9-4) reports 10 households in the intervention group and a participation rate of 8%. In their analysis of smart grids (including SMs) in Denmark, Hansen and Hauge [\[68\]](#page-8-14) used a sample of 20 households in a pilot experiment that addressed perceived and enacted control. Given inherent limitations, the American Journal of Neuroradiology suggests that statistical power figures and sample size calculations should be required only for large scale field studies, and not for pilot experiments [\[110\]](#page-9-11).

<span id="page-4-0"></span>

| Unit | Today     | Yesterday | This month | Total        |
|------|-----------|-----------|------------|--------------|
| DKK  | 14.87 DKK | 23.15 DKK | 616.84 DKK | 11058.75 DKK |
| kWh  | 6.61 kWh  | 10.29 kWh | 274.15 kWh | 4915.0 kWh   |

B)

My dashboard

Cost of electricity

Money lost on electricity

| Today (DKK)  | 19.8679 DKK |
|--------------|-------------|
| Weekly (DKK) | 209.9 DKK   |

Money lost from standby and passive electricity consumption

| DKK per day  | 5.18 DKK |
|--------------|----------|
| DKK per year | 1890 DKK |

Consumption overview

| Unit | Today     | Yesterday | This month | Total        |
|------|-----------|-----------|------------|--------------|
| DKK  | 19.66 DKK | 32.13 DKK | 51.8 DKK   | 11369.25 DKK |
| kWh  | 8.74 kWh  | 14.28 kWh | 23.02 kWh  | 5053.0 kWh   |

More than your average
Less than your averageNotifications overview

Budget overview

| Today      | 19.66 / 31.44 DKK    |
|------------|----------------------|
| This month | 51.8 / 943.2 DKK     |
| This year  | 8257.5 / 11475.0 DKK |

Fig. 1. Screenshot of SM technology and related information available to: A) the reference group, and B) the intervention group. Source: NorthQ© (used with permission) ([www.northq.com](http://www.northq.com)).

considerations meant that socio-economic data of participating households was not obtained. Given our sample size, the margin of error is 24.5%.

The intervention group consisted of 11 households, and the reference group consisted of five households. Data was collected in relation to total daily and weekly consumption (kWh/day and kWh/ week, respectively), average daily and weekly consumption (kWh), and overnight (standby) consumption (kWh/night). Change in consumption was analysed using two comparative methods (i.e. alternative baselines). The first approach (Method 1) tracked absolute electricity consumption, and measured the relative change from the first to the last week of the intervention. It compared average use at the beginning of the intervention (baseline 1) with average use at the end. The second approach (Method 2) calculated average consumption during the entire experiment and compared the deviation from data for a sample of 3000 Danish households (baseline 2). Daily readings were converted into weekly values and normalized; then weekly consumption was presented as a percentage of annual consumption. The baseline profile is shown in

<span id="page-5-1"></span>Image /page/5/Figure/2 description: The image shows a map of Denmark with a zoomed-in view of Copenhagen. The map of Denmark shows the regions of Nordjylland, Midtjylland, Syddanmark, and Sjaelland. The cities of Alborg, Viborg, Arhus, Vejle, Esbjerg, Odense, and Flensburg are also shown. The zoomed-in view of Copenhagen shows a residential area with black-roofed buildings circled in blue.

Fig. 2. Participating households (black-roofed buildings circled in blue). All are located in a residential area in the north-western part of central Copenhagen. Image to the right courtesy of Google©. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

#### [Fig. 3.](#page-6-0)

The annual baseline consumption profile was used to estimate weekly consumption, taking into account the time of year the meter was installed (week = 0). Actual consumption in week 0+X was compared to expected consumption and the difference was estimated, as shown below.

$$
E_{SmarIMeter} = \frac{C_{Actual} - C_{Expected}}{C_{Expected}} * 100\%
$$

A 'Difference in Differences' (DID) approach was taken to address the between-group effect [\[114\].](#page-9-12) Specifically, we looked at the change over time in the outcome variable for the intervention group, compared to the change over time for the reference group.[11](#page-5-2) Data were collected over a four-week period between July and August. As the study took place over the summer, there was no need for climate correction.

From a statistical point of view, and despite the small sample size, a paired-sample t-test was used to compare the mean values for the reference and intervention groups. Following statistical considerations in medical research suggested for pilot studies, different significance levels (α = .05–.30) and confidence intervals (i.e. 70–90%) were used.[12](#page-5-3) In addition, and to complement the DID estimates, we used the eta-squared (ɳ<sup>2</sup> ) statistic to address the effect size and provide another indication of the magnitude of the difference between the two groups.

#### <span id="page-5-0"></span>4. Results

Our findings indicate that electricity use decisions were affected by the way information was designed, framed and presented. The first analytical approach found that the reference group reduced their daily consumption by an average of 7%. On the other hand, the intervention group reduced their consumption by 18% (see [Table 1](#page-6-1)). The second analytical approach found an increase in daily electricity consumption of 2% for the reference group, and a decrease of 5% for the intervention group. Thus, a differential effect of −11% (method 1) and −7% (method 2) was found for daily electricity consumption.

Like daily data, standby consumption varied within and between households. The first analytical approach found a reduction in consumption of 3% for the reference group, compared to 28% for the intervention group ([Table 2\)](#page-6-2). The second approach found a 3% increase for the reference group, compared to an average reduction of 13% for the intervention group. A differential effect of −25% (method 1) and −16% (method 2) was estimated. These findings were consistent with the results of the first approach: reductions were higher when salient, loss-framed information was provided. The effect was even more pronounced for standby consumption. Consistent with the literature [\[118\],](#page-9-13) we hypothesised that cumulative feedback (annual cost in DDK) was an important driver, as it increased the salience of financial losses resulting from standby consumption. These results seem to be in line with other research [\[119\],](#page-9-14) and indicate that highlighting aggregate cost has the potential to enhance the effectiveness of SM technology. Results (including error bars) are shown in [Fig. 4](#page-6-3).

From a statistical point of view, we found a significant decrease in electricity use when a 30% significance level (α = .30) and a 70% confidence interval are used. These values seem consistent with significance thresholds suggested for pilot studies in medical research

<span id="page-5-2"></span><sup>11</sup> The DiD approach is a popular statistical technique used by social scientists when studying public interventions. It aims to reduce the effects of selection bias and exogenous factors [\[114\]](#page-9-12), but has several limitations (e.g. reverse causality or unobserved factors) [\[115\].](#page-9-15) In the case of energy-efficiency improvements and behavioural interventions, Allcott and Mullaninathan [\[10\]](#page-7-4) stress the difficulties of effectively controlling lurking (or confounding) variables when estimating casual effects. <sup>12</sup> Medical research suggests that for pilot studies the focus should be on descriptive

<span id="page-5-3"></span>statistics rather than hypothesis testing [\[116\].](#page-9-16) If testing is performed, Schoenfeld [\[117\]](#page-9-17) suggests that a very high type-I error rate should be used (e.g. 0.25).

<span id="page-6-0"></span>Image /page/6/Figure/2 description: The image is a line graph showing weekly consumption as a percentage of yearly total. The x-axis represents the week number, ranging from 1 to 51. The y-axis represents the weekly consumption as a percentage of yearly total, ranging from 0.0% to 2.5%. The line graph shows that the weekly consumption starts at around 2.1% in week 1, gradually decreases to around 1.6% in week 29, and then gradually increases to around 2.1% in week 51.

Fig. 3. Seasonal fluctuations in consumption for an average Danish household (Data from NorthQ, 2013).

#### <span id="page-6-1"></span>Table 1

Daily average electricity use for households based on first comparative approach.

|                                          | First week Average (kWh) | Mid-period week Average (kWh) | Last week Average (kWh) | Change in consumption ( $\Delta$ %) |
|------------------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| Intervention group (faming and salience) | 5.72                     | 4.88                          | 4.68                    | -18                                 |
| Reference group (No intervention)        | 5.10                     | -                             | 4.72                    | -7                                  |

#### <span id="page-6-2"></span>Table 2

Standby electricity use for households in based on first comparative approach.

|                                           | First week Average (kWh) | Mid-period week Average (kWh) | Last week Average (kWh) | Change in consumption (Δ%) |
|-------------------------------------------|--------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------|----------------------------|
| Intervention group (framing and salience) | 1.04                     | 0.94                          | 0.75                    | -28                        |
| Reference group (No intervention)         | 0.89                     | -                             | 0.86                    | -3                         |

<span id="page-6-3"></span>Image /page/6/Figure/10 description: The image is a bar chart comparing daily consumption and standby consumption for two methods, each with a reference and intervention phase. The y-axis represents percentage values from -40% to 20%. For Method 1, the reference phase shows a daily consumption of approximately -7% and a standby consumption of around -2%. The intervention phase for Method 1 shows a daily consumption of about -18% and a standby consumption of approximately -28%. For Method 2, the reference phase shows a daily consumption of around 2% and a standby consumption of about 3%. The intervention phase for Method 2 shows a daily consumption of approximately -6% and a standby consumption of about -12%. Error bars are included for each bar, indicating variability in the data.

Fig. 4. Summary of results (including error bars).

[\[110,116,117\]](#page-9-11). For daily electricity use, there is a statistically significant decrease from the reference group (M = 5.00, SD = 1.09) to the intervention group (M = 4.75, SD = 0.65), t (26) = 1.17, p-value = .25. The mean decrease in the intervention group was 0.24 with a confidence interval ranging from 0.025 to 0.471. Following the guidelines proposed by Cohen [\[120\]](#page-9-18), the estimated eta square statistic (0.05) is in the range of a 'moderate' effect. For standby consumption, there is a statistically significant decrease in electricity use from the reference group (M=0.91, SD = 0.13) to the intervention group

(M = 0.87, SD = 0.13), t (25) = 1.11, p-value = .27. The mean decrease in the intervention group was 0.03 with a confidence interval ranging from 0.0021 to 0.0771. The eta square statistic (0.05) is also in the range of a 'moderate' effect. Given the small sample size, these figures need to be taken with due caution.

The larger reductions in electricity use by the intervention group confirmed, initially, our hypothesis that seeing lower consumption as avoiding a loss may prove to be a greater incentive than viewing it as gaining a benefit. The results are also consistent with the literature that underscores the relevance of salience in SM studies [\[22\].](#page-8-33) However, considering the existing literature on 'standard' feedback provided via enabling technologies (e.g. SM, IHD or web portals), our results show a relatively similar (or slightly higher) level of effectiveness, which underlines the need for additional research. For instance, Schleich et al. [\[121\]](#page-9-19) ran a field trial in Austria and found reductions of 4.5%, highlighting that detailed feedback via a web portal or in paper statements was equally effective. A review of large-scale trials undertaken by four energy supply companies in the United Kingdom showed reductions of between 2 and 4.0% when a real-time display combined with SMs was implemented [\[122\]](#page-9-20). The effect increased when technical advice was given. Darby [\[105\]](#page-9-21) carried out a meta-analysis and showed that real-time feedback (via SM or IHD) resulted in savings in the range of 5–15%, especially for consumers with high bills. A review of various IHD interventions in the United States and Canada estimated reductions in consumption of 3–13% [\[106\].](#page-9-22) Interventions were most effective when users were asked to use prepayment systems and provided with IHD feedback.

This pilot study paves the way for a full-scale field experiment. In a nutshell, the results underscores the need to analyse the motivational and psychological drivers that can reduce electricity demand, which is a key gap in the literature [\[18,29\]](#page-8-0). Our findings also stress the extent to which loss aversion effects among consumers can be maintained in the long term, which is a critical issue for scholars [\[18,108,109\]](#page-8-0). Socioeconomic and demographic variables would be a valuable addition and an econometric analysis could be used to determine which factors significantly affect the results. Further research could de-link the impact of individual manipulations (loss aversion, salience) on demand.[13](#page-7-7) From a design point of view, there is also a need to compare a loss-framed, salient message with a gain-framed, salient message (e.g. 'Money saved from energy conservation' vs. 'Money lost from energy use'). This would require the estimation of energy savings over a longer period of time. To deal with large daily fluctuations, further research should also include weekly and monthly electricity use averages to be statistically tested. Given the high transaction costs related to the deployment of our pilot study, a 'natural experiment' might be a better alternative to a full-scale field experiment.[14](#page-7-8) This may be an effective strategy to overcome a potential 'Hawthorne effect' (i.e. participation in an experiment in itself modifies behaviour [\[124,125\]\)](#page-9-23). However, the growing literature on ethical and privacy issues (e.g. protection of personal data) affecting the acceptance of SM and related feedback initiatives suggests that research limitations remain. Ehrhardt-Martinez et al. [\[109\]](#page-9-24) argue that consumer acceptance and participation determine the effectiveness of feedback initiatives, including SM.

#### <span id="page-7-6"></span>5. Concluding remarks

The study explored to what extent loss-framed and salient information about electricity use via SM has the potential to induce household energy conservation. Taking a behavioural economics perspective, results suggest that how SM information is presented to households has an impact on how the feedback is perceived and acted upon. Despite the intrinsic nature of our pilot study, findings are in line with the emerging literature in the field, which highlights that policies that frame incentives as losses are more effective than those that frame them as rewards [\[19,22\]](#page-8-11). However, it is unwise to rush to any hasty conclusions without further research in the form of a large-scale field study.[15](#page-7-9) Estimated figures from the DID approach and the statistical tests suggest the usefulness of the intervention but also the need for additional research. At all events, we argue that the level of effectiveness of similar, non-pricing policy interventions is very likely to be context- and method-specific.

The study advocates for closer collaboration with policymakers, and further experimentation and evaluation of the choice of policy instruments. It suggests that SM policy needs to consider not only the provision of information, but how it is framed. The study supports claims that SM feedback, per se, is unlikely to be sufficient to promote energy efficiency and conservation [\[58,109\]](#page-8-34). Behavioural change can be better facilitated via the provision of information in different ways [\[10,11,18\].](#page-7-4) Finally, our results suggest that effective energy and climate policies should take into account a wider range of market and behavioural failures [\[11,19,24,26\]](#page-7-5).

#### Acknowledgements

The authors are very grateful to NorthQ for providing the equipment needed to undertake the pilot field experiment. Authors also appreciate valuable and constructive comments provided by four anonymous reviewers. Luis Mundaca acknowledges financial support from the Swedish Energy Agency, grant N<sup>o</sup> 38263-1.

#### References

- <span id="page-7-0"></span>[1] [R. Thaler, Misbehaving The Making of Behavioral Economics, \(2015\) Grand](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0005) [Haven, MI: Norton.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0005)
- [2] [P. Lunn, Regulatory Policy and Behavioural Economics, OECD, Paris, 2014.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0010) [3] [F. Beckenbach, W. Kahlenborn, New Perspectives for Environmental Policies](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0015)
- [Through Behavioral Economics, Springer, Heidelberg, 2016.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0015) [4] [J.F. Shogren, L.O. Taylor, On behavioral-environmental economics, Rev. Environ.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0020) [Econ. Policy 2 \(2008\) 26](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0020)–44.
- <span id="page-7-1"></span>[5] [A. Tversky, D. Kahneman, Advances in prospect theory: cumulative representation](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0025) [of uncertainty, J. Risk Uncertain. 5 \(1992\) 297](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0025)–323.
- <span id="page-7-2"></span>[6] [M. Pollitt, I. Shaorshadze, The Role of Behavioural Economics in Energy and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0030) [Climate Policy EPRG Working Paper 1130, \(2012\).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0030)
- [7] [K. Brekke, O. Johansson-Stenman, The behavioural economics of climate change,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0035) [Oxf. Rev. Econ. Policy 24 \(2008\) 280](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0035)–297.
- [8] [G. Loewenstein, R. Thaler, Anomalies: intertemporal choice, J. Econ. Perspect. 3](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0040) [\(1989\) 181](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0040)–193.
- [9] [D. Kahneman, J.L. Knetsch, R. Thaler, Fairness as a constraint on pro](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0045)fit seeking: [entitlements in the market, Am. Econ. Rev. 76 \(1986\) 728](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0045)–741.
- <span id="page-7-4"></span>[10] [H. Allcott, S. Mullainathan, Behavioral science and energy policy, Science 327](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0050) [\(2010\) 1204](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0050)–1205.
- <span id="page-7-5"></span>[11] [E. Frederiks, K. Stenner, E. Hobman, Household energy use: applying behavioural](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0055) [economics to understand consumer decision-making and behaviour, Renew.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0055) [Sustain. Energy Rev. 41 \(2015\) 1385](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0055)–1394.
- <span id="page-7-3"></span>[12] [T. Dietz, G. Gardner, J. Gilligan, P. Stern, M. Vandenbergh, Household actions can](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0060) [provide a behavioral wedge to rapidly reduce US carbon emissions, Proc. Natl.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0060) [Acad. Sci. 106 \(2009\) 18452](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0060)–18456.
- [13] [J. Faber, M. Smit, K. Zimmermann, R. Soboh, J. van Riet, C. Rhode, et al.,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0065) [Behavioural Climate Change Mitigation Options and Their Appropriate Inclusion](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0065) [in Quantitative Longer Term Policy Scenarios, CE Delft, Fraunhofer ISI, LEI](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0065) [Wageningen, Delft, 2012.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0065)
- [14] [T.B. Johansson, A. Patwardhan, L. Gomez-Echeverri, N. Naki](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0070)ćenović, Global [Energy Assessment \(GEA\), Cambridge University Press, International Institute for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0070) [Applied Systems Analysis, Cambridge; Laxenburg, Austria, 2012.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0070)
- [15] [G. Peters, From production-based to consumption-based national emission in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0075)[ventories, Ecol. Econ. 65 \(2008\) 13](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0075)–23.
- [16] [E. Somanathan, T. Sterner, T. Sugiyama, D. Chimanikire, N. Dubash, J. Essandoh-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0080)[Yeddu, et al., National and sub-national policies and institutions, in: O. Edenhofer,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0080) [R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0080) [I. Baum, S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlömer,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0080) [C. von Stechow, T. Zwickel, J.C. Minx \(Eds.\), Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0080) [Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0080)

<span id="page-7-7"></span><sup>13</sup> A reviewer suggested that to test the individual impact of salience, the following [of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0080) experimental design would be required: participants are randomly assigned to one of three groups: 1) Display with electricity presented in kWh; 2) Display with electricity presented in kWh+loss-frame, and 3) Display with electricity presented in kWh+total

<span id="page-7-8"></span>costs. <sup>14</sup> The term 'natural experiment' refers to naturally-occurring events that contain features of a field experiment such that 'subject participants' are unaware that they are in a field experiment [\[123\]](#page-9-25). In a natural field experiment, "subjects are randomly selected from the population, and randomly assigned to a treatment group and control group" [\[25\]](#page-8-35).

<span id="page-7-9"></span><sup>15</sup> With respect to sampling, one of the aims of our pilot was to determine the sample size for a full-scale experiment. The 2017–2019 Danish Energy Strategy states that Denmark has made a committment to 100% SM coverage by the end of 2020—a total of 2.6 million residential smart metering points. Assuming: a) that all of these SM points are able to accommodate an 'add-on' SM, so framed information can be provided as in our study; b) a margin of error of 5%; and c) a confidence level of 95%, a minimum sample of 385 SM points is needed.

[Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 2014.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0080)

- [17] [L. Mundaca, A. Markandya, Assessing regional progress towards a green energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0085) [economy, Appl. Energy 179 \(2016\) 1372](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0085)–1394.
- <span id="page-8-0"></span>[18] [W. Abrahamse, L. Steg, C. Vlek, T. Rothengatter, A review of intervention studies](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0090) [aimed at household energy conservation, J. Environ. Psychol. 25 \(2005\) 273](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0090)–291.
- <span id="page-8-11"></span>[19] [K. Gillingham, K. Palmer, Bridging the energy e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0095)fficiency gap: policy insights from [economic theory and empirical evidence, Rev. Environ. Econ. Policy 8 \(2014\)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0095) 18–[38.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0095)
- [20] [D. Gromet, H. Kunreuther, R. Larrick, Political ideology a](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0100)ffects energy-efficiency [attitudes and choices, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 110 \(2013\) 9314](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0100)–9319.
- [21] [I. Kastner, P. Stern, Examining the decision-making processes behind household](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0105) [energy investments: a review, Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 10 \(2015\) 72](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0105)–89.
- <span id="page-8-33"></span>[22] M.K. Price, Using fi[eld experiments to address environmental externalities and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0110) [resource scarcity: major lessons learned and new directions for future research,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0110) [Oxf. Rev. Econ. Policy 30 \(2014\) 621](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0110)–638.
- <span id="page-8-1"></span>[23] [C. Wilson, H. Dowlatabadi, Models of decision making and residential energy use,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0115) [Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 32 \(2007\) 169](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0115)–203.
- [24] T. Tietenberg, Reflections—energy effi[ciency policy: pipe dream or pipeline to the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0120) [future? Rev. Environ. Econ. Policy 3 \(2009\) 304](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0120)–320.
- <span id="page-8-35"></span>[25] [R. Hahn, R. Metcalfe, The impact of behavioral science experiments on energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0125) [policy, Econ. Energy Environ.Policy 5 \(2016\) 27](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0125)–44.
- <span id="page-8-15"></span>[26] [J. Gowdy, Behavioral economics and climate change policy, J. Econ. Behav.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0130) [Organ. 68 \(2008\) 632](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0130)–644.
- <span id="page-8-3"></span>[27] [C. Kolstad, K. Urama, J. Broome, A. Bruvoll, M. Cariño Olvera, D. Fullerton, et al.,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0135) [Social, economic and ethical concepts and methods, in: O. Edenhofer, R. Pichs-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0135)[Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler, I. Baum,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0135) [S. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlömer, C. von](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0135) [Stechow, T.J.C. Zwickel. Minx \(Eds.\), Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0135) [Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0135) [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0135) [Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 2014.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0135)
- <span id="page-8-28"></span>[28] [L. Lutzenhiser, Social and behavioral aspects of energy use, Annu. Rev. Energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0140) [Environ. 18 \(1993\) 247](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0140)–289.
- [29] L. Steg, G. Perlaviciute, E. van der Werff[, Understanding the human dimensions of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0145) [a sustainable energy transition, Front. Psychol. 6 \(2015\) 1](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0145)–17.
- <span id="page-8-2"></span>[30] H. [Simon, A behavioral model of rational choice, Q. J. Econ. \(1955\) 99](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0150)–118.
- [31] [H. Simon, Rational choice and the structure of the environment, Psychol. Rev. 63](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0155) [\(1956\) 129](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0155)–138.
- <span id="page-8-4"></span>[32] [H. Simon, Rationality in psychology and economics, J. Bus. \(1986\) S209](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0160)–S224. [33] [E. Hirst, M. Brown, Closing the e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0165)fficiency gap: barriers to the efficient use of
- [energy Resources, Conserv. Recycl. 3 \(1990\) 267](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0165)–281. [34] A.B. Jaffe, R.N. Stavins, The energy-effi[ciency gap: what does it mean? Energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0170)
- [Policy 22 \(1994\) 804](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0170)–810. [35] [B. Sovacool, What are we doing here? Analyzing](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0175) fifteen years of energy scholar[ship and proposing a social science research agenda, Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 1 \(2014\)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0175) 1–[29.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0175)
- <span id="page-8-5"></span>[36] [J. Coleman, T. Fararo, Rational Choice Theory, SAGE Publications, Newbury Park,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0180) [1992.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0180)
- [37] [W.J. Goode, Rational choice theory, Am. Soc. 28 \(1997\) 22](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0185)–41.
- <span id="page-8-6"></span>[38] [L. Mundaca, L. Neij, E. Worrell, M. McNeil, Evaluating energy e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0190)fficiency policies [with energy-economy models, Ann. Rev. Environ. Resour. 35 \(2010\) 305](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0190)–344.
- [39] [S. Attari, M. DeKay, C.I. Davidson, W. de Bruin, Changing household behaviors to](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0195) [curb climate change: how hard can it be? Sustain.: J. Rec. 4 \(2011\) 9](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0195)–11.
- [40] [T. Dietz, P. Stern, E. Weber, Reducing carbon-based energy consumption through](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0200) [changes in household behavior, Daedalus 142 \(2013\) 78](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0200)–89.
- [41] [R.W. Gates, Investing in energy conservation: are homeowners passing up high](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0205) [yields? Energy Policy 11 \(1983\) 63](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0205)–72.
- [42] [K. Gillingham, R.G. Newell, K. Palmer, Energy e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0210)fficiency economics and policy, [Ann. Rev. Resour. Econ. 1 \(2009\) 597](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0210)–620.
- [43] [L. Klotz, Cognitive biases in energy decisions during the planning, design, and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0215) [construction of commercial buildings in the United States: an analytical frame](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0215)[work and research needs, Energy E](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0215)ffic. 4 (2011) 271–284.
- [44] [P. Stern, K. Janda, M. Brown, L. Steg, E. Vine, L. Lutzenhiser, Opportunities and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0220) [insights for reducing fossil fuel consumption by households and organizations,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0220) [Nat. Energy 1 \(2016\) 16043.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0220)
- [45] M.A.R. [Lopes, C.H. Antunes, N. Martins, Energy behaviours as promoters of energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0225) effi[ciency: a 21st century review, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 16 \(2012\)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0225) 4095–[4104.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0225)
- [46] J. Jackson, Promoting energy effi[ciency investments with risk management](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0230) [decision tools, Energy Policy 38 \(2010\) 3865](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0230)–3873.
- <span id="page-8-7"></span>[47] [EC, Next Steps for Smart Grids: Europe](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0235)'s Future Electricity System Will Save Money and Energy – [Press Summary, \(2011\) Brussels.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0235)
- <span id="page-8-8"></span>[48] [C.F. Covrig, M. Ardelean, J. Vasiljevska, A. Mengolini, G. Fulli, E. Amoiralis, Smart](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0240) [Grid Projects Outlook 2014, \(2014\).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0240)
- <span id="page-8-9"></span>[49] [S. Depuru, L. Wang, V. Devabhaktuni, Smart meters for power grid: challenges,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0245) [issues, advantages and status, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 15 \(2011\) 2736](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0245)–2742.
- [50] [A. Faruqui, D. Harris, R. Hledik, Unlocking the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0250) € 53 billion savings from smart [meters in the EU: how increasing the adoption of dynamic tari](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0250)ffs could make or break the EU'[s smart grid investment, Energy Policy 38 \(2010\) 6222](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0250)–6231.
- [51] [V. Giordano, G. Fulli, M. Jiménez, A. Mengolini, A. Meletiou, C. Covrig, et al.,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0255) [Smart Grid Projects in Europe: Lessons Learned and Current Developments, Joint](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0255) [Research Centre of the European Commission, Petten, NL, 2013.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0255)
- [52] [EC, Benchmarking Smart Metering Deployment in the EU-27 with a Focus on](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0260) [Electricity, \(2014\) Brussels.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0260)
- <span id="page-8-10"></span>[53] [S. Darby, Smart metering: what potential for householder engagement? Build. Res.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0265) [Inf. 38 \(2010\) 442](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0265)–457.

- <span id="page-8-32"></span>[54] [F. Gangale, A. Mengolini, I. Onyeji, Consumer engagement: an insight from smart](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0270) [grid projects in Europe, Energy Policy 60 \(2013\) 621](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0270)–628.
- [55] [T.J. Gerpott, M. Paukert, Determinants of willingness to pay for smart meters: an](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0275) [empirical analysis of household customers in Germany, Energy Policy 61 \(2013\)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0275) 483–[495.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0275)
- <span id="page-8-31"></span>[56] [S. Kaufmann, K. Künzel, M. Loock, Customer value of smart metering: explorative](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0280) [evidence from a choice-based conjoint study in Switzerland, Energy Policy 53](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0280) [\(2013\) 229](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0280)–239.
- [57] [T. Krishnamurti, D. Schwartz, A. Davis, B. Fischho](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0285)ff, W. de Bruin, L. Lave, et al., [Preparing for smart grid technologies: a behavioral decision research approach to](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0285) [understanding consumer expectations about smart meters, Energy Policy 41](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0285) [\(2012\) 790](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0285)–797.
- <span id="page-8-34"></span>[58] [M. Nachreiner, B. Mack, E. Matthies, K. Tampe-Mai, An analysis of smart metering](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0290) [information systems: a psychological model of self-regulated behavioural change,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0290) [Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 9 \(2015\) 85](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0290)–97.
- [59] E. van der Werff[, L. Steg, The psychology of participation and interest in smart](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0295) [energy systems: comparing the value-belief-norm theory and the value-identity](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0295)[personal norm model, Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 22 \(2016\) 107](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0295)–114.
- [60] [W. Abrahamse, L. Steg, C. Vlek, T. Rothengatter, The e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0300)ffect of tailored informa[tion, goal setting, and tailored feedback on household energy use, energy-related](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0300) [behaviors, and behavioral antecedents, J. Environ. Psychol. 27 \(2007\) 265](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0300)–276.
- [61] K. Gram-Hanssen, Effi[cient technologies or user behaviour, which is the more](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0305) [important when reducing households](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0305)' energy consumption? Energy Effic. 6 (2013) 447–[457.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0305)
- [62] [B. Mills, J. Schleich, Residential energy-e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0310)fficient technology adoption, energy [conservation, knowledge, and attitudes: an analysis of European countries, Energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0310) [Policy 49 \(2012\) 616](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0310)–628.
- <span id="page-8-30"></span>[63] [W. Gans, A. Alberini, A. Longo, Smart meter devices and the e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0315)ffect of feedback on [residential electricity consumption: evidence from a natural experiment in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0315) [Northern Ireland, Energy Econ. 36 \(2013\) 729](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0315)–743.
- [64] S. D'[Oca, S. Corgnati, T. Buso, Smart meters and energy savings in Italy:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0320) determining the eff[ectiveness of persuasive communication in dwellings, Energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0320) [Res. Soc. Sci. 3 \(2014\) 131](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0320)–142.
- [65] [A. Kavousian, R. Rajagopal, M. Fischer, Determinants of residential electricity](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0325) [consumption: using smart meter data to examine the e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0325)ffect of climate, building [characteristics, appliance stock, and occupants](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0325)' behavior, Energy 55 (2013) 184–[194.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0325)
- <span id="page-8-12"></span>[66] [K. Ek, P. Söderholm, The devil is in the details: household electricity saving](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0330) [behavior and the role of information, Energy Policy 38 \(2010\) 1578](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0330)–1587.
- <span id="page-8-13"></span>[67] [J. Pyrko, El-info via digitala kanaler. Potential att förändra elanvändning i](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0335) [bostäder Fallstudie 3 EnergiDialog-Privat hos E.ON Sverige AB, \(2009\).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0335)
- <span id="page-8-14"></span>[68] [M. Hansen, B. Hauge, Scripting, control, and privacy in domestic smart grid](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0340) [technologies: insights from a Danish pilot study, Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 25 \(2017\)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0340) 112–[123.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0340)
- <span id="page-8-25"></span>[69] [C. Moore, R.E. Carter, P. Nietert, P. Stewart, Recommendations for planning pilot](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0345) [studies in clinical and translational research, Clin. Transl. Sci. 4 \(2011\) 332](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0345)–337.
- [70] [T. Baker, Doing Social Research, 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill Humanities/Social](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0350) [Sciences/Languages, Boston, 1998.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0350)
- <span id="page-8-29"></span>[71] [D. Kahneman, Maps of bounded rationality: psychology for behavioral economics,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0355) [Am. Econ. Rev. 93 \(2003\) 1449](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0355)–1475.
- <span id="page-8-18"></span>[72] D. [Kahneman, A perspective on judgment and choice: mapping bounded ration](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0360)[ality, Am. Psychol. 58 \(2003\) 697.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0360)
- <span id="page-8-16"></span>[73] [R. Thaler, Toward a positive theory of consumer choice, J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 1](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0365) [\(1980\) 39](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0365)–60.
- [74] [A. Tversky, D. Kahneman, The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0370) [Science 211 \(1981\) 453](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0370)–458.
- [75] [D. Kahneman, A. Tversky, Prospect theory: an analysis of decision under risk,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0375) [Econ.: J. Econ. Soc. \(1979\) 263](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0375)–291.
- <span id="page-8-26"></span>[76] [D. Kahneman, A. Tversky, Choices, Values, and Frames, Cambridge University](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0380) [Press, New York, 2000.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0380)
- <span id="page-8-17"></span>[77] [D. Kahneman, J. Knetsch, R. Thaler, Anomalies: the endowment e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0385)ffect, loss [aversion, and status quo bias, J. Econ. Perspect. 5 \(1991\) 193](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0385)–206.
- [78] [D. Kahneman, J. Knetsch, R. Thaler, Experimental tests of the endowment e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0390)ffect [and the Coase theorem, J. Polit. Econ. 98 \(1990\) 1325](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0390)–1348.
- [79] [E. van Dijk, D. van Knippenberg, Buying and selling exchange goods: loss aversion](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0395) and the endowment eff[ect, J. Econ. Psychol. 17 \(1996\) 517](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0395)–524.
- [80] [D. Genesove, C. Mayer, Loss aversion and seller behavior evidence from the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0400) [housing market, Q. J. Econ. 116 \(2001\) 1233](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0400)–1260.
- [81] [A. Tversky, D. Kahneman, Loss aversion in riskless choice: a reference-dependent](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0405) [model, Q. J. Econ. 106 \(1991\) 1039](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0405)–1061.
- <span id="page-8-19"></span>[82] [W. Samuelson, R. Zeckhauser, Status quo bias in decision making, J. Risk](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0410) [Uncertain. 1 \(1988\) 7](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0410)–59.
- [83] [S. Organ, D. Proverbs, G. Squires, Motivations for energy e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0415)fficiency refurbishment [in owner-occupied housing, Struct. Surv. 31 \(2013\) 101](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0415)–120.
- <span id="page-8-20"></span>[84] [M. Gonzales, E. Aronson, M. Costanzo, Using social cognition and persuasion to](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0420) [promote energy conservation: a quasi-experiment 1, J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 18](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0420) [\(1988\) 1049](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0420)–1066.
- <span id="page-8-21"></span>[85] [M. Farsi, Risk aversion and willingness to pay for energy e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0425)fficient systems in rental [apartments, Energy Policy 38 \(2010\) 3078](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0425)–3088.
- <span id="page-8-22"></span>[86] [S.Z. Attari, M. DeKay, C. Davidson, W. De Bruin, Public perceptions of energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0430) [consumption and savings, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107 \(2010\) 16054](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0430)–16059.
- <span id="page-8-23"></span>[87] K. Ek, P. Söderholm, Households' switching [behavior between electricity suppliers](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0435) [in Sweden, Util. Policy 16 \(2008\) 254](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0435)–261.
- <span id="page-8-24"></span>[88] H. Allcott, The welfare eff[ects of misperceived product costs: data and calibrations](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0440) [from the automobile market, Am. Econ. J.: Econ. Policy 5 \(2013\) 30](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0440)–66.
- <span id="page-8-27"></span>[89] [H. Allcott, M. Greenstone, Is there an energy e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0445)fficiency gap? J. Econ. Perspect. 26

[\(2012\) 3](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0445)–28.

- <span id="page-9-0"></span>[90] [D. Greene, Uncertainty, loss aversion, and markets for energy e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0450)fficiency, Energy [Econ. 33 \(2011\) 608](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0450)–616.
- [91] [H. Ruderman, M.D. Levine, J.E. McMahon, The behavior of the market for energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0455) effi[ciency in residential appliances including heating and cooling equipment,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0455) [Energy J. 8 \(1987\).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0455)
- [92] K. Train, Discount rates in consumers' [energy related decisions: a review of the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0460) [literature, Energy 10 \(1985\) 1243](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0460)–1253.
- [93] [R.J. Sutherland, Market barriers to energy-e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0465)fficiency investments, Energy J. 12 [\(1991\) 15](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0465)–34.
- <span id="page-9-1"></span>[94] [C.A. Spurlock, Loss Aversion and Time-Di](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0470)fferentiated Electricity Pricing, Lawrence [Berkeley National Laboratory \(LBNL\), Berkeley, CA \(United States\), Berkeley,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0470) [2015.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0470)
- <span id="page-9-2"></span>[95] [A. Faruqui, S. Sergici, Household response to dynamic pricing of electricity: a](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0475) [survey of 15 experiments, J. Regul. Econ. 38 \(2010\) 193](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0475)–225.
- <span id="page-9-3"></span>[96] [M. Nicolson, G. Huebner, D. Shipworth, Are consumers willing to switch to smart](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0480) time of use electricity tariff[s? The importance of loss-aversion and electric vehicle](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0480) [ownership, Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 23 \(2017\) 82](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0480)–96.
- <span id="page-9-4"></span>[97] [P. Bradley, A. Coke, M. Leach, Financial incentive approaches for reducing peak](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0485) [electricity demand, experience from pilot trials with a UK energy provider, Energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0485) [Policy 98 \(2016\) 108](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0485)–120.
- <span id="page-9-9"></span>[98] [A. Faruqui, The ethics of dynamic pricing, Electr. J. 23 \(2010\) 13](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0490)–27.
- [99] [B. Alexander, Dynamic pricing? Not so fast! A residential consumer perspective,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0495) [Electr. J. 23 \(2010\) 39](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0495)–49.
- <span id="page-9-5"></span>[100] [T. Brennan, Consumer preference not to choose: methodological and policy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0500) [implications, Energy Policy 35 \(2007\) 1616](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0500)–1627.
- <span id="page-9-6"></span>[101] [D. Pichert, K. Katsikopoulos, Green defaults: information presentation and pro](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0505)[environmental behaviour, J. Environ. Psychol. 28 \(2008\) 63](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0505)–73.
- <span id="page-9-7"></span>[102] [C. Loock, T. Staake, F. Thiesse, Motivating energy-e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0510)fficient behavior with green is: [an investigation of goal setting and the role of defaults, Mis Q. 37 \(2013\)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0510) 1313–[1332.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0510)
- <span id="page-9-10"></span>[103] [O. Mont, M. Lehner, E. Heiskanen, Nudging A Tool for Sustainable Behaviour?](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0515) [Swedish Environmental Protection Agency, Bromma Sweden, 2014.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0515)
- <span id="page-9-8"></span>[104] [R. Gandhi, C. Knittel, P. Pedro, C. Wolfram, Running randomized](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0520) field experiments for energy effi[ciency programs: a practitioner](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0520)'s guide, Econ. Energy [Environ. Policy 5 \(2016\) 7](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0520)–26.
- <span id="page-9-21"></span>[105] S. Darby, The Eff[ectiveness of Feedback on Energy Consumption, a Review for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0525) [DEFRA of the Literature on Metering, Billing and Direct Displays, \(2006\).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0525)
- <span id="page-9-22"></span>[106] [A. Faruqui, S. Sergici, A. Sharif, The impact of informational feedback on energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0530) consumption—[a survey of the experimental evidence, Energy 35 \(2010\)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0530) 1598–[1608.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0530)
- [107] [R. Osbaldiston, J. Schott, Environmental sustainability and behavioral science](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0535)

[meta-analysis of pro-environmental behavior experiments, Environ. Behav. \(2011\)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0535) [0013916511402673.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0535)

- [108] [G. Owen, J. Ward, Smart Meters in Great Britain: the Next Steps, Sustainability](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0540) [First, 2007, pp. 1](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0540)–68.
- <span id="page-9-24"></span>[109] [K. Ehrhardt-Martinez, K.A. Donnelly, S. Laitner, et al., Advanced Metering](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0545) [Initiatives and Residential Feedback Programs: a Meta-review for Household](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0545) [Electricity-saving Opportunities, American Council for an Energy-E](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0545)fficient [Economy, Washington, DC, 2010.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0545)
- <span id="page-9-11"></span>[110] [A. Trout, T. Kaufmann, D. Kallmes, No signi](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0550)ficant difference … says who? AJNR [Am. J. Neuroradiol. 28 \(2007\) 195](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0550)–197.
- [111] J.M. Bohli, C. Sorge, O. Ugus, A Privacy Model for Smart Metering, (2010), pp. 1–5, <http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCW.2010.5503916> Capetown.
- [112] [C. Cuijpers, B.J. Koops, Smart metering and privacy in europe: lessons from the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0560) [Dutch case, in: S. Gutwirth, R. Leenes, P. Hert, Y. Poullet \(Eds.\), European Data](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0560) [Protection: Coming of Age, Springer, Netherlands, 2013, pp. 269](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0560)–293.
- [113] [K. Raimi, L. Carrico, Understanding and beliefs about smart energy technology,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0565) [Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 12 \(2016\) 68](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0565)–74.
- <span id="page-9-12"></span>[114] A. Abadie, Semiparametric difference-in-diff[erences estimators, Rev. Econ. Stud.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0570) [72 \(2005\) 1](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0570)–19.
- <span id="page-9-15"></span>[115] M. Bertrand, E. Dufl[o, S. Mullainathan, How much should we trust di](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0575)fferences-indiff[erences estimates? Q. J. Econ. 119 \(2004\) 249](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0575)–275.
- <span id="page-9-16"></span>[116] [E. Lee, A. Whitehead, R. Jacques, S. Julious, The statistical interpretation of pilot](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0580) trials: should significance [thresholds be reconsidered? BMC Med. Res. Methodol.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0580) [14 \(2014\) 41.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0580)
- <span id="page-9-17"></span>[117] [D. Schoenfeld, Statistical considerations for pilot studies, Int. J. Radiat. Oncol.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0585) [Biol. Phys. 6 \(1980\) 371](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0585)–374.
- <span id="page-9-13"></span>[118] [R. Bittle, R. Valesano, G. Thaler, The e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0590)ffects of daily feedback on residential [electricity usage as a function of usage level and type of feedback information, J.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0590) [Environ. Syst. 9 \(1979\) 275](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0590)–287.
- <span id="page-9-14"></span>[119] B. Gilbert, J. Graff[-Zivin, Dynamic salience with intermittent billing: evidence](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0595) [from smart electricity meters, J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 107 \(Part A\) \(2014\)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0595) 176–[190.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0595)
- <span id="page-9-18"></span>[120] [J. Cohen, Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences, 2nd ed., Lawrence](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0600) [Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, N.J, 1988.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0600)
- <span id="page-9-19"></span>[121] [J. Schleich, M. Klobasa, S. Gölz, M. Brunner, E](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0605)ffects of feedback on residential electricity demand—findings from a fi[eld trial in Austria, Energy Policy 61 \(2013\)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0605) 1097–[1106.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0605)
- <span id="page-9-25"></span><span id="page-9-20"></span>[122] [G. Raw, D. Ross, Energy Demand Research Project: Final Analysis, AECOM, 2011.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0610)
- <span id="page-9-23"></span>[123] [G. Harrison, J. List, Field experiments, J. Econ. Lit. 42 \(2004\) 1009](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0615)–1055. [124] J.G. Adair, The Hawthorne eff[ect: a reconsideration of the methodological artifact,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0620)
- [J. Appl. Psychol. 69 \(1984\) 334.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0620)
- [125] [S.R. Jones, Was there a Hawthorne e](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2214-6296(17)30102-0/sbref0625)ffect? Am. J. Sociol. 4 (1992) 1–468.